---
layout: post
title: "English Tenses"
date: 2006-08-26 09:45:57 +0800
tags: random
---

## Present continuous
  * An activity of something happening now:\\
    They're talking
  * A temporary situation:\\
    I am not feeling well today
  * A future plan:\\
    They are having a party next week
  * About change, development and progress:\\
    Life is getting easier thanks to technology
  * With always, to criticise or complain:\\
    You are always interupting me!

## Present simple
  * About things that are always true
  * With words like never, sometimes, often, always, every day, etc to talk about regular and repeated actions:\\
    My parents never eat meat.
  * About general facts about our lives:\\
    We live in a small house.

## Present Perfect
  * For something happened in the past but has an effect in the present:\\
    He has had a bad accident.\\
    I have already seen the film.
  * Refer to the very recent past:\\
    He has just passed his exams.
  * For somethign which started in the past and is still going on:\\
    I have lived there for five years.
  * About the past up to the present:\\
    I have been to Canada.
  * For something which still has not happened but is expected to happen:\\
    I have not finished the book yet.
  * Not to be used in a clause with a past time expression:\\
    I read it __last week__.
  * After words like when, after, until, as soon as, etc., to talk about something in the future:\\
    I will write to you as soon as I have heard from Jenny.

Has gone and has been:
  * Somebody has gone to a place means he is still there:\\
    He has gone to school
  * Somebody has been to a place means he went there once but he is not there now:\\
    He has been to school

## Present Perfect Continuous
  * Continuous verbs: The action goes on for some time, e.g. drive, live, make, stand, study, travel, watch, wait, walk, work
  * For emphasising how long something has been going on up to the present:\\
    We have been travelling for three hours.
  * To show that something is still going on:\\
    I have been reading your book.
  * To show something is temporary:\\
    I have been working as a ski instructor, but now I am looking for a new job.

## Past simple
  * To talk about things that happened in the past:\\
    I stayed in that hotel last week.
  * To talk about the general past, and about regular actions:\\
    Our friends often visited us there.

## Past continuous
  * For an action which was interrupted by anther action:\\
    I was reading the newspaper when the doorbell rang.
  * For an action which was still in progress at a particular time:\\
    At 2:15 we were still waiting for the bus.
  * To set the scene for a story or for a series of events:\\
    In was 1975. We were living in a small house in Liverpool.\\
    One the day I had my accident, I was preparing for my examinations.

## Past Perfect
  * When you are talking about past time, you use the past perfect for something which happened earlier and has an effect on the time you are talking about.\\
    I didn't go to the film with my wife because I had already seen it.
  * Refers to something which had happened very recently:\\
    I was feeling very tired because I had just finished work.
  * For something which started earlier and was still going on at the time you are talking about:\\
    I had lived there for five years.
  * To talk about the time up to the time you are talking about:\\
    In 1997, I had never been to America.
  * For something which had not happened at the time you are talking about:\\
    I had never met him before.

## Past perfect continuous
  * To talk about something which had been going on for some time:\\
    We had been travelling for three hours


## Present tenses for the future
  * Use present simple for fixed date/time in the future:\\
    The next train arrives at 11:30.
  * Use present continuous tense for plans or arrangements for the future:\\
    I am seeing Jill next week.
  * Use present tense of verbs like hope, expect, intend, want with a to-infinitive clause for future with uncertain arrangements:\\
    We hope to see you soon.
  * After the verb "hope", we use present simple to refer to the future:\\
    I hope you enjoy your holiday.
  * Present tenses are often used to refer to the future in clauses with "if" and with time words like "when" or "before":\\
    You will not get lost if you have a good map.

## Will and going to
  * When you know that something will happen, use present simple:\\
    The next train arrives at 11:30
  * When you predict something will happen, use "will" or "going to":\\
    It will be sunny tomorrow.\\
    It is going to rain.
  * Use "going to" for prediction with evidence:\\
    I missed the bus. I am going to be late.
  * Use "going to" for a warning:\\
    Watch out, we are going to crash.
  * Use "will" for a promise:\\
    I will call you later.
  * Use "going to" for a decision you have made:\\
    I am going to stay at home tonight.
  * Use "will" for a decision you have just made:\\
    I will go to see him.

## There
  * "There is" for the noun is singular after "there":\\
    There is a book on the table
  * "There are" for the noun is plural after "there":\\
    There are two books on the table
  * "There is" for two nouns joined by "and" after "there" and the first noun is singular:\\
    There is a man and two women.
  * For questions: "there" is placed before "be" or after "is/was/were":\\
    Are there some oranges left?\\
    Will there be enough time?

## In/on/at time
  * "at" is for:
     * Clock times, e.g. at 10:30
     * Meals, e.g. at breakfast
     * Festivals, e.g. at Easter
  * "on" is for:
     * days, e.g. on Monday
     * dates, e.g. on 10 May
     * parts of a specific day, e.g. on Tuesday evening
     * special days, e.g. on Christmas eve
     * special occations, e.g. on my birthday
  * "in" is for:
     * parts of the day, e.g. in the morning
     * seasons, e.g. in winter
     * months, e.g. in January
     * years, e.g. in 2000
     * centuries, e.g. in the 20th century
   * Example: At 10:30 on 10 May in 2000
