---
layout: post
title: "A Study of the Coexistence of Heterogeneous Flows on Data Networks"
date: 2006-01-11 00:49:16 +0800
tags: work
---

[Whole file](https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B6DoI_vm0OLfNmVjeE9yMkNjeEU)\\
[Slides for Oral Defence](https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B6DoI_vm0OLfWkVkdmVaSWpxOTA)\\
[Source code of the simulation program](https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B6DoI_vm0OLfUHBHTy0yWVozWG8)

## Abstract
In data networks, there are two types of flows, elastic and inelastic.
Elastic flows can work with a wide range of throughput but inelastic
flows can only proceed with a particular data rate, not higher and
not lower. Elastic flows is the dominating type in the Internet. There
is abundant prior work in the literature on how to regulate elastic
data flows in the network. The introduction of inelastic flows to
coexist with elastic flows creates a problem. Inelastic flows, by
definition, do not want to be subjected to congestion control; yet
without control, they are likely to compete unfairly with elastic
flows.

This thesis is a study of such traffic coexistence. We study several
different control mechanisms that can be adopted by the inelastic
flows, namely TCP-friendly congestion control, a variety of admission
control and no control. We then formulate metrics and methodologies
to evaluate these control mechanisms. Finally, we discuss the feasibility
and concerns of implementing these control mechanisms to shed a light
on the way to realise our proposals.

Our work shows that in a traffic coexistence environment, the inelastic
flows can use admission control besides congestion control to make
the resource allocation fair. Moreover, admission control is more
suitable for inelastic flows because it makes the throughput of inelastic
flows predictable. According to our analysis, certain ways of doing
admission control can perform no worse than TCP-friendly congestion
control in various metrics. Therefore, admission control on traffic
coexistence environment is a field of worthwhile study.

## Table of Contents
  * Abstract
  * Part 1: Background
    * 1. Background on coexistence
    * 2. Model of Heterogeneous Flows
  * Part 2: Evaluation
    * 3. Stability of network under different controls
    * 4. Bandwidth allocation
    * 5. Evaluation based on utility functions
    * 6. Blocking probability
    * 7. Population
  * Part 3: Conclusion
    * 8. Conclusion
  * Appendices
    * A. Glossary
    * B. Introduction to Poisson counter driven stochastic differential equations
    * C. Simulation

