---
layout: post
title: "Best of the Best by IEEE"
date: 2007-06-01 09:35:30 +0800
tags: random
---

Yesterday, I came across the Swindon Bookstore and found a book "Best of the Best: Fifty Years of Communications and Networking Research" by IEEE Communications Society. It is to celebrate its 50th anniversary and this book is a compilation of some 56 important papers.

The following is the contents:
  - Physical and Link Layer Aspects of Communications
     - Turbo Space-Time Processing to Improve Wireless Channel Capacity.
     - A Simple Transmit Diversity Technique for Wireless Communications.
     - A Space-Time Coding Modem for High-Data Rate Wireless Communications.
     - Near Optimum Error Correcting Coding and Decoding: Turbo-Codes.
     - Erlang Capacity of a Power Controlled CDMA System.
     - Decorrelating Decision-Feedback Multiuser Detector for Synchronous Code-Division Multiple-Access Channel.
     - Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing Networks: Principles and Applications.
     - Near-Far Resistance of Multiuser Detectors in Asynchronous Channels.
     - Multiple-Symbol Differential Detection of MPSK.
     - The Effects of Time Delay Spread on Portable Radio Communication Channels with Digital Modulation.
     - A Statistical Model for Indoor Multipath Propagation.
     - Standardized Fiber Optic Transmission Systems. A Synchronous Optical Network View.
     - Analysis and Simulation of a Digital Mobile Channel Using Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing.
     - Efficient Modulation for Hand-Limited Channels.
     - Optimum Combining in Digital Mobile Radio with Cochannel Interference.
     - MMSE Equalization of Interference of Fading Diversity Channels.
     - The SL Undersea Lightguide System.
     - Distribution of the Phase Angle Between Two Vectors Perturbed by Gaussian Noise.
     - Cochannel Interference Considerations in Frequency Reuse Small-Coverage-Area Radio Systems.
     - GMSK Modulation for Digital Mobile Radio Telephony.
     - Continuous Phase Modulation-Part 1: Full Response Signaling.
     - Continuous Phase Modulation-Part II: Partial Response Signaling.
     - Carrier and Bil Synchronization in Data Communication. A Tutorial Review.
     - Tamed Frequency Modulation. A Novel Method to Achieve Spectrum Economy in Digital Transmission.
     - Performance Evaluation for Phase-Coded Spread-Spectrum Multiple-Access Communication Part I: System Analysis.
     - The Throughput of Packet Broadcasting Channels.
     - Maximum Likelihood Receiver for Multiple Channel Transmission Systems.
     - An Optimum Linear Receiver for Multiple Channel Transmission Systems.
     - Adaptive Maximum-Likelihood Receiver for Carrier-Modulated Data-Transmission Systems.
     - Error Probability in the Presence of Intersymbol Interference and Additive Noise for Multilevel Digital Signals.
     - Coherence Demodulation of Frequency-Shift Keying with Low Deviation Ratio.
     - Data Transmission by Frequency-Division Multiplexing Using the Discrete Fourier Transform.
     - Viterbi Decoding for Satellite and Space Communication.
     - Convolutional Codes and Their Performance in Communication Systems.
     - An Adaptive Decision Feedback Equalizer.
     - Performance of Optimum and Suboptimum Synchronizers.
     - Correlative Digital Communication Techniques.
     - Characterization of Randomly Time-Variant Linear Channels.
     - On the Optimum Detection of Digital Signals in the Presence of White Gaussian Noise. A Geometric Interpretation and a Study of Three Basic Data Transmission Systems.
     - Performance of Combined Amplitude and Phase-Modulated Communication Systems.
     - Synchronous Communications.
  - Networking
     - On the Self-Similar Nature of Ethernet Traffic (Extended Version).
     - A Generalized Processor Sharing Approach to Flow Control in Integrated Services Networks: The Single-Node Case.
     - DQDB Networks with and without Bandwidth Balancing.
     - Input Versus Output Queueing on a Space-Division Packet Switch.
     - Routing in the Manhattan Street Network.
     - Bottleneck Flow Control.
     - Routing and Flow Control in TYMNET.
     - OSI Reference Model. The ISO Model of Architecture for Open Systems Interconnection.
     - Deadlock Avoidance in Store-and-Forward Networks. Store-and-Forward Deadlock.
     - A Minimum Delay Routing Algorithm Using Distributed Computation.
     - Packet Switching in Radio Channels: Part 1-Carrier Sense Multiple-Access Modes and Their Throughput-Delay Characteristics.
     - Packet Switching in a Multiaccess Broadcast Channel: Performance Evaluation.
     - A Protocol for Packet Network Intercommunication.
     - On Distributed Communications Networks.
     - Routing Procedures in Communications Networks. Part 1: Random Procedures.
