---
layout: post
title: "Rechargable Batteries"
date: 2007-12-20 13:23:01 -0500
tags: random
---

I mean those Nickel-Cadmium and Nikel-Metal Hydride rechargable batteries that we use at home, not car.

## Batteries

NiMH cells are more common than NiCd nowadays. One of the example of NiMH is
composed of nickel oxyhyrodxide, aqueous potassium hydroxide solution, and metal
hydride. The chemical equations are:

Positive (+0.52V): $\textrm{NiO(OH)} + \textrm{H}_2\textrm{O} + \textrm{e}^- \to \textrm{Ni(OH)}_2 + \textrm{OH}^-$

Negative (-0.83V): $\textrm{MH} + \textrm{OH}^- \to \textrm{M} + \textrm{H}_2\textrm{O} + \textrm{e}^-$

The metal that used on the negative electrode varies (see
[Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nickel_metal_hydride_battery)).
Although the chemistry measured at 1.35V, the charging voltage shall be
1.4-1.6V.

The rechargable cells are subject to *memory effect* or called *voltage
depression*. This means the battery carries less charge after a series of
regular partial discharge-partial recharge process (e.g. satellite using solar
power for recharging). This result from the active chemical that did not
discharged before recharging will undergo some physical change and increased the
cell's internal resistance. NiMH usually does not have this phenonmenon although
it is well-known for NiCd. A deep discharge and recharge can cure this.

Rechargable batteries will self-discharge. It (NiMH) discharges around 5-10%
energy on the first day and 0.5-1% per subsequent day at room temperature. Hence
the shelf life of NiMH batteries is normally a few months. Some cells have
longer shelf life due to new technology, and named as "ready-to-use" or
"pre-charged batteries". An example is my GP ReCyko batteries. It claims to have
80% capacity after one year in shelf at room temperature.

## Chargers

Charging rechargables is not as trivial as it seems to be. There are different
ways to charge. Also, in order to conserve the battery, it needs to know when to
stop charging.

To recharge batteries, we can provide a constant DC voltage to the reversed
polarity. This works for Pb-H<sub>2</sub>SO<sub>4</sub> car batteries. For NiMH
and NiCd, we apply constant current.

More sophisticated ways of recharging exists. For example, we may use pulsed
charging which charge for 1 sec and cut off the circuit for 20-30 msec to let
the cell stablize (i.e. let the recharged active chemical diffuse away from the
electrode) and then repeat. A variation of pulsed charging is negative pulse
charging, which draws current (double of the charge current) out of the battery
for a short time (e.g. 5 msec) instead of using open circuit for stablization.
This is claimed to be able to eliminate the bubbles at electrodes.

There are several types of chargers for the batteries: slow charger (0.1C, takes
14-16 hours), quick charger (0.3C, takes 3-6 hours) and fast charger (1C, takes
1 hour). The capacity measured in ampere-hour (Ah) is called the C. If the
battery has 2000mAh, then the 0.1C current used in slow charger is 200mA.
Usually chargers will have only up to 80% efficiency.

The way to know when to terminate depends on the types of battery. Common safety
measure is the temperature cut-off to prevent overheat during over-charging. For
NiCd batteries, continuous charging will make the cell voltage drop after the
peak is attained, due to the polarization and oxygen build-up. Hence the
*negative delta V* (NDV) is a method for termination, but only works for larger
charge current.

$dT/dt$ is the way for NiMH which does not have NDV. It measures the temperature
change per unit time and stop charging when the temperature rises too fast. NiMH
batteries can also measure the $dV/dt$, which levels off when the batteries are
full.

## Memory Effect

In NiCd batteries, memory effect can occur. It means that, when a battery is
discharged to $X$ and fully recharged, the battery refuse to further deliver power
when it discharged to the previous level $X$ again.

This is due to crystalline formation at anode (cadmium hydroxide). A new battery
shall have the crystalline of size of 1um, but when memory effect occur, the
crystalline grows to 100um. This decreases the surface area for reaction.
Crystalline formation can also occur by overcharging the battery without deep
discharge for a prolonged time. Therefore periodic discharge is needed (i.e.
exercising the battery).

A way to break the crystalline is to recondition the battery: Slowly drain the
current until the cell is in 0.6-0.4V.

## References

  * [Battery Chargers and Charging Methods](http://www.mpoweruk.com/chargers.htm)
  * [Cell Construction](http://www.mpoweruk.com/cell_construction.htm)
  * [NiCd Battery Charger](http://www.angelfire.com/electronic/hayles/charge1.html)
  * [How to Restore Nickel-based Batteries](http://batteryuniversity.com/learn/article/how_to_restore_nickel_based_batteries)
