---
title: "My HKALE Notes"
date: 2007-03-27 16:07:25
tags: work
---
These are really really old stuff.

I took the HKALE in 1999 and during 1998 to 1999, I created a set of notes for
my revision. After I get into the university, I re-organized them up and put
them into an archive. Unfortunately, my hard disk crashed in 2003 (possibly due
to over-heat) and all my stuff are lost.

Recently, I get them back from a CD-ROM (I really don't remember I have a copy
on CD! Thanks Ronnie for that) and I put them here, in case somebody needs. The
files are created using M$ Word 97.

PS: I found that the HKEA sucks.....the current syllabus is trimmed so much! No
wonder I found the current freshmen are so dumb in certain aspects.

## AL Chemistry

- [Classification of questions](/img/chemlist.doc)
- [Periodic Table](/img/chempt.doc)
### Physical Chemistry
- [Atomic Structure](/img/chemphy-01.doc)
- [Stiochiometry](/img/chemphy-02.doc)
- [Electronic structure](/img/chemphy-03.doc)
- [Energetics](/img/chemphy-04.doc)
- [Bonding](/img/chemphy-05.doc)
- [Shapes & Hybridization](/img/chemphy-06.doc)
- [Energetics of Bond](/img/chemphy-07.doc)
- [Bonding Intermediate](/img/chemphy-08.doc)
- [Solid Crystal Structures](/img/chemphy-09.doc)
- [Intermolecular Forces](/img/chemphy-10.doc)
- [Chemical Kinetics](/img/chemphy-11.doc)
- [Rate Equations](/img/chemphy-12.doc)
- [Collision Theory](/img/chemphy-13.doc)
- [Acid-Base Equilibria](/img/chemphy-14.doc)
- [Redox Equilibria](/img/chemphy-15.doc)
- [Phase Equilibria](/img/chemphy-16.doc)
### Inorganic Chemistry
- [Periodic Properties](/img/cheminorg-1.doc)
- [Hydrolytic Behavior](/img/cheminorg-2.doc)
- [s-Block Elements](/img/cheminorg-3.doc)
- [Halogens](/img/cheminorg-4.doc)
- [Nitrogen](/img/cheminorg-5.doc)
- [Sulphur](/img/cheminorg-6.doc)
- [d-Block Elements](/img/cheminorg-7.doc)
### Organic Chemistry
- [Organic Compounds](/img/chemorg-01.doc)
- [Isomerism](/img/chemorg-02.doc)
- [Organic Reaction](/img/chemorg-03.doc)
- [Hydrocarbons](/img/chemorg-04.doc)
- [Halogeno-Compounds](/img/chemorg-05.doc)
- [Hydroxy Compounds](/img/chemorg-06.doc)
- [Carbonyl Compounds](/img/chemorg-07.doc)
- [Carboxylic Acid](/img/chemorg-08.doc)
- [Nitrogenous Compound](/img/chemorg-09.doc)
- [Synthesis & Interconversion](/img/chemorg-10.doc)
### Chemistry and Society
- [Chemistry and environment](/img/chemsoc-1.doc)
- [Chemistry and food](/img/chemsoc-2.doc)

## AL Physics

- [Classification of questions](/img/phylist.doc)
- [The Formula Sheet](/img/phyformulae.pdf)
- [Data Treatment](/img/phy-data.doc)
- [Mechanics](/img/phy-mech.doc)
- [Electricity and Magnetism](/img/phy-em.doc)
- [Waves](/img/phy-waves.doc)
- [Matters](/img/phy-matters.doc)
- [Atomic Physics](/img/phy-atom.doc)

## AL Pure Mathematics

- [Classification of questions](/img/purelist.doc)
- [Summary of important concepts](/img/pure-precise.doc)
- [Formulae and equations cheatsheet](/img/pure-f.doc)
- [Formulae and equations cheatsheet, in B5 size](/img/pure-f-b5.doc)
- [Logic & Sets](/img/pure-01.doc)
- [Mathematical Induction](/img/pure-02.doc)
- [Binomial Theorem](/img/pure-03.doc)
- [Limits](/img/pure-04.doc)
- [Differentiation](/img/pure-05.doc)
- [2D Coordinate Geometry](/img/pure-06.doc)
- [Polynomials & Equations](/img/pure-07.doc)
- [Indefinite Integrals](/img/pure-08.doc)
- [Inequality](/img/pure-09.doc)
- [Determinants](/img/pure-10.doc)
- [Definite Integration](/img/pure-11.doc)
- [Matrix](/img/pure-12.doc)
- [Sequence & Series](/img/pure-13.doc)
- [3D Coordinate Geometry](/img/pure-14.doc)
- [Vector Algebra](/img/pure-15.doc)
- [Polar Coordinate System](/img/pure-16.doc)
- [Geometric Applications of Definite Integrals](/img/pure-17.doc)
- [Complex Numbers](/img/pure-18.doc)
- [Greek alphabets](/img/greek.doc)
