---
layout: post
title: "AJAX Mistakes"
date: 2007-07-26 14:40:45 +0800
tags: code
---

As taken from <http://alexbosworth.backpackit.com/pub/67688>, there are a couple of things to avoid/think about before using AJAX:

  - Using Ajax for the sake of Ajax \\
    When you took AJAX as a cool toy
  - Breaking the back button \\
    Back button is for the whole page, given that pages doesn't refresh
    on AJAX actions, it is dysfunctioned
  - Not giving immediate visual cues for clicking widgets \\
    AJAX means wait for action complete without refreshing pages. But
    refreshing a page can be a visual clue to the users, which AJAX removed
    it. Work around: The red "loading..." at the top-right corner in Gmail.
  - Leaving offline people behind \\
    Offline = no AJAX. So you can't open a tab or so.
  - Don’t make me wait for Ajax \\
    In case the network is slow, it sucks.
  - Sending sensitive information in the clear \\
    Something we have to care about: doing encryption in Javascript.
  - Assuming AJAX development is single platform development \\
    There is *one* non-standard browser flying around: IE
  - Too much code makes the browser slow \\
    Remember: Javascript runs on client browser
  - Not having a plan for those who do not enable or have JavaScript \\
    Still, 11% people don't support JavaScript.
  - Inventing new UI conventions \\
    DIV can be clicked? People expects buttons. So give more clue.
  - Changing state with links (GET requests) \\
    A fetched page will have different look-and-feel at different time,
    which confuses cache.
  - Blinking and changing parts of the page unexpectedly \\
    Annoying and confusing
  - Not using links I can pass to friends or bookmark \\
    AJAX can't be bookmarked, unless extra work is done, preferably by the
    server side, such as providing a "bookmark this" button.
  - Not cascading local changes to other parts of the page
  - Asynchronously performing batch operations \\
    Synchronization on parallel tasks
  - Scrolling the page and making me lose my place
  - Blocking Spidering \\
    Even if you allow people to bookmark it, search engine can't correctly
    index the page.

So you got a list of reasons to turn down the use of AJAX.
