---
layout: post
title: "Mori, Uchida, Goto (2005) Flow Analysis of Internet Traffic: World Wide Web versus Peer-to-Peer"
date: 2009-01-11 10:41:50 -0500
category: paper
bibtex:
  type: article
  title: "Flow Analysis of Internet Traffic: World Wide Web versus Peer-to-Peer"
  author: "Tatsuya Mori and Masato Uchida and Shigeki Goto"
  journal: "Systems and Computers in Japan"
  volume: 36
  number: 11
  pages: "70--81"
  year: 2005
  note: "Translated from Denshi Joho Tsushin Gakkai Ronbunshi 電子情報通信學會論文誌, Vol. J87-D-I, No. 5, May 2004, pp. 561–571"
---
The paper quoted that, in mid-1990s to early-2000s, most traffic is web while
the amount of P2P traffic became comparable to web since then. This paper is to
measure the P2P traffic, as well as web traffic for the knowledge of traffic
models. The measurement is made on an Internet link of Waseda University
(早稻田大學) for a night (6pm to 12mn).

The result is that, around 70% of flows are WWW and P2P flows accounts for less
than 1%. But the traffic volue of WWW and P2P are respectively 58% and 22%. The
flows' interarrival time are exponential in both WWW and P2P traffic, even their
mean interarrival time are respectively 0.015s and 15s. Their correlation
coefficient against exponential is greater than 0.99.

Power spectral density is also obtained. The PSD is defined as

$$ I(f)=\dfrac{1}{2\pi N}\sum_{k=1}^N T_\delta(k)e^{jkf/2}, $$

where $T_\delta(k)$ are the flow interarrival times. The PSD plot shows that, in
WWW traffic, $I(f)$ has a decrease tendency with $f$ but P2P traffic remains flat
with $f$. This means WWW traffic has long range dependency but P2P does not have
time correlation.

Considering the flow size distributions (number of bytes), the cummulative
percentage-flow size plot is linear in the log-log scale when we consider the
size of 10K to 100M. This means the flow size distribution can be modelled by
Pareto distribution. The small flow size region increases slowly and the large
flow size region increases rapidly in the cummulative percentage The Pareto
parameter $\alpha$ is measured to be 1.11 in the WWW traffic and 0.38 in the P2P
traffic. Since $\alpha<1$ in P2P, it is highly heavy-tailed. But the WWW traffic
has finite mean in flow size.

The flow duration distribution of both WWW and P2P shows a non-linear behaviour
in the log-log plot of cummulative fraction against duration. The nonlinearity
suggests log-normal distribution, i.e. duration $\log D \sim N(\mu,\sigma^2)$,
which is found to be a very good approximate in the middle ranges. The
log-normal distribution is also found in the flow rate (flow size divided by
duration).
