---
layout: post
title: "Santos et al (2003) End-to-End Congestion Control for InifiBand (INFOCOM)"
date: 2009-10-12 00:40:19 -0400
category: paper
bibtex:
  type: inproceedings
  title: End-to-End Congestion Control for InifiBand
  author: "Jose Renato Santos and Yoshio Turner and G. (John) Janakiraman"
  booktitle: "Proc INFOCOM"
  year: 2003
---
Because InfiniBand switch are input-buffered, there would be the case that a
victim flow choked when some other flow caused a congestion. An example would
be, switch A has a flow to switch B port 1 which this port is oversubscribed,
and hence congested. Switch A has another flow to switch B port 2 which it is
this port's only user. But because of the input buffering, this victim flow
cannot send at full speed because of backlog at the port connecting switches A
and B. In this paper, it called congestion spreading because congestion at port
1 spreaded its effect to other ports.

IB uses FECN to mark the congestion and BECN to tell the congestion back to the
sender. However, because of input buffering, it cannot mark the
congestion-creating flows efficiently and leads to unfairness. This paper
propose a solution to that, in three steps: (1) switch triggers packet marking
whenever a buffer is full, (2) any output link that is the destination for at
least one packet is classified as a congested link, (3) all packets that cannot
leave the congested link immediately are marked.

At the source host part, window-based control can provide self-clocked
transmission but not suitable for IB because the BDP of IB is very small (1
packet only). The small range of useful window size limits its ability of
congestion control. Thus in IB, we need injection rate control. The injection
rate is increased and decreased reactive to congestion level. There are some
criteria for the design of rate change functions:

  - Avoid congestion: The rate of a flow is expected to oscillate, i.e. increased and
    decreased successively. In that case, we should make
    $f_{\textrm{inc}}(f_{\textrm{dec}}(r))\le r$ to prevent congestion blow up
  - Promote fairness: The recovery time (i.e. time between a decrease from rate $r$ to
    return to rate $r$ of a lower rate should be faster than a higher rate.
  - Maximizing bandwidth utilization: Reclaim link bandwidth as fast as possible,
    i.e. recovery time shall equals to the inter-packet delay at minimum possible rate
    $R_{\min}$

The paper derived increment and decrement functions for any rate $r$. The Fast
Increase Multiplicative Decrease (FIMD) functions are using MD for decrease and
expoential for increase. The Linear Inter-Packet Delay functions are using
function $f_{\mathrm{dec}}(r)=R_{\max}/(\frac{R_{\max}}{r}+1)$ as decrease
function (so that inter-packet delay is linear to rate) and the corresponding
increase function is $f_{\mathrm{inc}}(r)=r/(1-\frac{R_{\min}}{R_{\max}})$.

The paper compares FIMD, LIPD, and AIMD control for different traffic pattern. It is found that LIPD can give highest utilization but FIMD can adapt to changes faster.
