---
layout: post
title: "Kandula et al (2005) Walking the Tightrope: Responsive Yet Stable Traffic Engineering (SIGCOMM)"
date: 2009-10-21 20:17:35 -0400
category: paper
bibtex:
  type: inproceedings
  title: "Walking the Tightrope: Responsive Yet Stable Traffic Engineering"
  author: "Srikanth Kandula and Dina Katabi and Bruce Davie and Anna Charny"
  booktitle: "Proc. SIGCOMM'05"
  month: "August 21-26"
  year: 2005
  address: "Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA"
---
This paper is about how to do traffic engineering in a multipath network, so
that traffic can be splitted to different paths and in the same time, change the
splitting ratio to adapt to network utilization levels.

We assume the network has multipath and the different path from between two edge
routers are known. This paper than proposes the TeXCP protocol for distributed
traffic engineering (TE) so that load can be balanced across different paths.
TeXCP tries to minimize the maximum link utilization in the network.

TeXCP is supplied with a set of paths, configured by the ISP and pined with
reservation protocols like RSVP-TE. Then TeXCP pick the shortest K paths and
distribute traffic among them. It sends periodic probe packet from an edge to
another edge across all different paths. The probe packet contains a link
utilization field which is overwritten by the routers and echoed by the end
point of the path. The echoed probe tells the sending edge router the highest
utilization on the path. Then, TeXCP periodically runs load balancer to adjust
the load share, so that the maximum load among different paths can be lowered
after the adjustment.

To avoid oscillation, TeXCP adopts the approach similar to
[XCP](/2009-10-07-khr02-xcp), that the router supplies positive and negative
feedback for load changes, so that multiple TeXCP agents can be coordinated in
catching the bandwidth share.
