---
layout: post
title: "Rodriguez et al (2009) Oblivious Routing Schemes in Extended Generalized Fat Tree Networks (CLUSTER)"
date: 2010-06-21 15:21:53 -0400
category: paper
bibtex:
  type: inproceedings
  title: "Oblivious Routing Schemes in Extended Generalized Fat Tree Networks"
  author: "German Rodriguez and Cyriel Minkenberg and Ramon Beivide and Ronald P. Luijten and Jesus Labarta and Mateo Valero"
  booktitle: "Proc. IEEE International Conference on Cluster Computing and Workshops"
  howpublished: "CLUSTER'09"
  pages: "1--8"
  month: "Aug 31-Sep 4"
  year: 2009
  address: "New Orleans, LA"
---
The subject of study in this paper is a generalized fat tree. It has n levels of switch and each switch can have different number of downstream and upstreams. A regular fat tree, $$k$$-ary $$n$$-tree, has each switch connects to $$k$$ downstreams.

Route a communication in fat tree is equivalent to choosing one of the nearest common ancestor (NCA) in the fat tree. Three different routing schemes are evaluated, they are namely, random, S-mod-k and D-mod-k. Random is to choose the NCA randomly. S-mod-k and D-mod-k choose the NCA by taking modulus on the source and destination address.

The paper found the following:

  - S-mod-k and D-mod-k are merely equivalent
  - There are cases that random does better than S-mod-k/D-mod-k and some cases that it does worse

According to the analysis, the paper propose that a better oblivious algorithms satisfies the following:

  - Concentrate the endpoint contention. This is why S-mod-k/D-mod-k do better than random if there are
    endpoint contention
  - Distribute load amongst roots. This is why random does better if there is no endpoint contention
  - Break down the regular dependencies of typical applications' patterns

The paper suggest a relabeling of nodes and then apply S-mod-k/D-mod-k. The relabeling is like a randomization, but preserves the locality such that endpoint contention can be identified. Then the S-mod-k or D-mod-k can effectively distribute load to roots.
