---
layout: post
title: "Sarolahti and Kuznetsov (2002) Congestion Control in TCP (Usenix)"
date: 2010-06-04 17:00:00 -0400
category: paper
bibtex:
  type: inproceedings
  title: Congestion Control in TCP
  author: Pasi Sarolahti and Alexey Kuznetsov  
  howpublished: Usenix
  booktitle: "Proceedings of Usenix 2002/Freenix Track"
  pages: "49--62"
  month: June
  year: 2002
  address: "Monterey, CA, USA"
---
A survey paper on how Linux implements the congestion control in TCP.

# TCP basics

The basics of TCP is specified in RFC793 and the dominant variant, NewReno, is specified in RFC2581.

TCP uses cwnd, the sender's estimate of how much data can be outstanding in the
network, to regulate transmission rate. It is initialized to 1-2. In slow
start, it is increased by one for each incoming ACK. In congestion avoidance,
it is increased by one in a round-trip time. The slow start threshold,
ssthresh, determines whether the TCP is in slow start or congestion avoidance.
CA iff cwnd ≥ ssthresh.

Lost of packet is detected by duplicate ACKs. After 3 duplicated ACKs, the
sender retransmits a segment and set ssthresh to half of the currently
outstanding  data. Then, cwnd is set to ssthresh+3 segments, to account for the
segments that have already left the network. In effect, the sender halves the
Tx rate as packet loss is an indication of congestion.

Retransmission due to incoming dup ACKs is *fast retransmit*. After that, TCP
is in *fast recovery* to wait until all segments in the last window have been
acknowledged. During fast recovery, TCP sender maintains the number of
outstanding segments, i.e. send one new segment for each incoming ACK as far as
cwnd allows. Precisely, during fast recovery, cwnd increase by one per ACK to
allow transmission of new segment. But once the fast recovery is over, the cwnd
restored to the value at the beginning of fast recovery. Two ways to end fast
recovery is suggested: (1) upon the receipt of the first new ACK; (2) after all
segments in the last window has been ACKed. The latter is suggested in NewReno
(RFC2582).

Retransmission timeout (RTO) also triggers retransmission. It expires when no
new ACK received for a while. When RTO occurs, cwnd is reset to one segment.
RTO value is determined by RTT. Precisely as follows (RFC2988):

```
RTTVAR = 0.75 * RTTVAR + 0.25 |SRTT - RTT|
SRTT = 0.875 * SRTT + 0.125 * RTT
RTO = max(SRTT + 4*RTTVAR, 1 second)
```

where RTT is the measured round trip time.

If cumulative ACK is used, recovery in TCP allows only one retransmission per
round-trip time. SACK is proposed in RFC2018 to acknowledge scattered blocks of
incoming data, so that the sender can retransmit more than one segment in an
RTT. SACK needs consensus of both ends. There are two ways to interpret SACK:
(1) all unacknowledged data are outstanding in the network; (2) Forward
Acknowledgements, i.e. all unacknowledged packets are assumed lost. The latter
is too aggressive if reordering is common. RFC2883 suggests an extended use of
SACK, the duplicate SACK or DSACK. It reports also the duplicated segment so
that sender can know about spurious retransmissions. The sender can therefore
learn about the reordering behaviour and adapt to the network condition.

TCP timestamp options is proposed in RFC1323. It allows more accurate RTT
measurements, especially when BDP is high. Timestamps are attached to each TCP
segment and echoed by the receiver. Another reason for timestamp is to protect
against old segments from previous incarnations of TCP. Moreover, timestamp can
help detecting unnecessary retransmissions, by Eifel algorithm. Eifel algorithm
suggests that if the ACK timestamp is earlier than the corresponding one in
retransmission buffer, the retransmission is unnecessary. Then, the change to
cwnd can be reverted.

RFC3168 suggests explicit congestion notification (ECN). It suggests routers to
mark packets when they arrived a congested point. The TCP sender who received a
echoed ECN should reduce its transmission rate.

# Linux TCP

RFCs said TCP can send when cwnd is smaller than by `SND.NXT-SND.UNA`, but Linux
compares cwnd with the number of outstanding packets. That is, Linux is
operated in packet units while RFC is in byte units.

Linux supports both interpretations of SACK. When SACK is used, Linux keeps track on the number of in-flight packets by

```
left_out = sacked_out + lost_out
in_flight = packets_out - left_out + retrans_out
```

where

  - `packets_out` is the number of originally transmitted segments above `SND.UNA`
  - `sacked_out` is the number of segments acknowledged by SACK
  - `lost_out` is the estimated number of segments lost in the network (for FACK)
  - `retrans_out` is the number of retransmitted segments

If no SACK, sacked_out is increased by one for every duplicated ACK, so that the behaviour of NewReno is conformed.

Linux keeps a scoreboard for segments. Segments can be marked as any combination of outstanding, acknowledged, retransmitted, or lost.

Besides the TCP state machine, Linux sender keeps another state:

  - Open: Normal state in which the sender increases cwnd according to slow start of congestion
    avoidance upon ACK received.
  - Disorder: Sender detected dup ACKs or SACKs. cwnd is not adjusted but each incoming ACK triggers
    transmission of a new segment. It follows the *packet conservation principle* that a new packet
    is sent only if an old packet has left the network. This behaviour is similar to that of RFC3042
  - CWR (Congestion Window Reduced): Sender received congestion notifications (ECN or ICMP source quench
    or otherwise) but with no outstanding retransmissions. The cwnd is reduced by one segment for every
    second incoming ACK until the window is halved. CWR state is interrupted by Recovery or Loss state.
  - Recovery: After sender received sufficient amount of successive dup ACKs and retransmitted the first
    unacknowledged segment. The cwnd is reduced by one segment for every second incoming ACK, until
    cwnd == ssthresh. The cwnd is not increased. Sender either retransmits segments that marked lost or
    makes forward transmission of new segment according to the packet conservation principle. Sender
    transit into Open state when all outstanding segments at the time recovery state was entered are
    acknowledged.
  - Loss: When RTO expires. All outstanding segments are marked lost, and cwnd is set of one segment.
    Slow start is performed. In Loss state, cwnd is increased but Recovery state only allows cwnd
    decrease. Loss state transmit to Open state only after all segments marked loss are acknowledged.

There are some features in TCP that Linux implemented differently.

Linux RTO is in the granularity of 10ms. Some other implementation has
granularity as large as 500ms. Linux allows the minimum RTO of 200ms instead of
1s in the specification. To avoid the problem of sudden decrease of RTT causing
RTO to be overestimated, the calculation of mean deviation is adaptive:

```c
if (RTT < SRTT && |SRTT-RTT| > RTTDEV) {
    MDEV = 31/32 * MDEV + 1/32 * |SRTT-RTT|
} else {
    MDEV = 0.75 * MDEV + 0.25 * |SRTT-RTT|
}
```

Then `MDEV` is used to calculate `RTTDEV` and RTO. `RTTDEV` and `MDEV` are separate
variables: `RTTDEV` allows to decrease for once only in a round trip time but
`MDEV` is a continuous estimate.

TCP specification suggests to avoid the silly window syndrome by delaying the
ACK for a maximum of 500ms. Linux adjusts the delay timer dynamically to
estimate the doubled packet inter-arrival time, with maximum limited to 200ms.
But for the first incoming segments at the beginning of the connection, ACK is
immediate. This behaviour, known as *quick acknowledgement*, is to speed up the
transmission in the beginning of slow start. Quick ACK stops when half of the
receiver's advertised window is occupied.

RFC2861 suggests *congestion window validation*. It is triggered when the cwnd
is not fully used, in which case may give an invalid estimate of network
conditions. The TCP sender decreases cwnd to half way between the current cwnd
and its utilization.
