---
layout: post
title: "Nelakuditi & Zhang (2001) On Selection of Paths for Multipath Routing (IWQoS)"
date: 2011-07-13 02:30:36 -0400
category: paper
bibtex:
  type: inproceedings
  title: "On Selection of Paths for Multipath Routing"
  author: "Srihari Nelakuditi and Zhi-Li Zhang"
  booktitle: "Proceedings of IWQoS"
  pages: "170--186"
  year: "2001"
---
Extended version of this paper:

    @article{"
      title = "On Selection of Candidate Paths for Proportional Routing",
      author = "Srihari Nelakuditi and Zhi-Li Zhang and David H.C. Du",
      journal = "Computer Networks",
      volume = "44",
      pages = "79--102",
      year = "2004"
    }

Problem of shortest path routing: Unbalanced traffic distribution. Some links are increasingly congested while other links are underloaded. Therefore, multipath routing is introduced.

Minimizing number of multipaths is important because of:

  - Overhead in establishing, maintaining, and tearing down of paths
  - Complexity in distributing traffic to paths increases as the number of paths increases
  - There are limits imposed by, for example, MPLS label spaces

OSPF is a link state protocol with infrequent link state update. We can piggyback QoS information with the updates.

# Minimizing overall blocking probability

This paper proposes the following problem setup:

  - Source routing network
  - Route over paths set up a priori
  - All flows have the same bandwidth demand (1 unit)
  - Flow arrive Poisson, holding time is exponential (M/M/1)
  - Performance metric is the overall blocking probability
  - Objective: Proportional QoS routing, i.e. route flows to paths to minimize overall blocking probability as experienced by flows

The global optimal proportioning problem is the following:

Assume all nodes know the network topology and the offered load between every source-destination pair.
Then we define $$\hat c_\ell >0$$ to be the capacity of (unidirectional) link $$\ell$$ and $$\sigma = (s,d)$$ to
be a source-destination pair. Given the arrival rate and holding time of this pair to be $$\lambda_\sigma$$
and $$\mu_\sigma$$ respectively, its offered load is $$\nu_\sigma = \lambda_\sigma/\mu_\sigma$$. Assume that
the set of all feasible path for routing σ to be $$\hat{R}_\sigma$$.

The global optimal proportioning problem is therefore, to find
$$ \{\alpha_r^\ast, r\in\hat{R}_\sigma\} $$
such that
$$ \sum_{r\in\hat{R}_\sigma} \alpha_r^\ast = 1 $$
and
$$ W=\sum_\sigma\sum_{r\in\hat{R}_\sigma}\alpha_r\nu_\sigma(1-b_r) $$
is maximized, where $$b_r$$ is the blocking probability on path $$r$$, which could be derived from Erlang's
formula using capacity of $$\hat{c}$$, and M/M/1 arrival-departure pattern of offered load $$\nu$$.

Usually, we use only a subset of paths $$R_\sigma \subset \hat R_\sigma$$ such that for some small $$\epsilon$$, $$R_\sigma = \{r: r\in\hat{R}_\sigma, \alpha_r^\ast>\epsilon\}$$.

Solving the global optimal proportioning problem requires the global knowledge on the offered load. Therefore localized strategies exists to achieve the near-optimal solution. Two strategies are mentioned in the paper, they are:

  - equalizing blocking probabilities (ebp): To make $$b_{r_1} = b_{r_2} = \cdots = b_{r_k}$$
     on one source-destination pair and their $$k$$ paths
  - equalizing blocking rate (ebr): To make $$\alpha_{r_1}b_{r_1} = \alpha_{r_2}b_{r_2} = \cdots = \alpha_{r_k}b_{r_k}$$

In the paper, ebp is used, with an approximation. Instead of calculating the adjustments directly, the fractions $$\alpha_{r_i}$$ are adjusted adaptively at a frequency $$\theta$$. It is first find the average blocking probability $$\bar{b} = \sum_i\alpha_{r_i}b_{r_i}$$, and increase $$\alpha_{r_i}$$ if $$b_{r_i} < \bar{b}$$ or decrease otherwise. The amount of adjustment is depended on $$\lvert b_{r_i} - \bar{b}\rvert$$.

## Minimizing the number of candidate paths

The set of paths for a particular source-destination pair is determined by "widest disjoint paths" (wdp).

The width of a path is the residual bandwidth on its bottleneck link, i.e.
$$ w_r = \min_{\ell\in r} c_\ell $$
where $$c_\ell = \hat c_\ell - \nu_\ell$$ is the average residual bandwidth on link $$\ell$$. Usually, we compute the residual bandwidth on a link by using the utilization $$u_\ell$$ as reported by the link state update, i.e.
$$ c_\ell = (1-u_\ell)\hat{c}_\ell $$.
The distance of a path is defined as $$\sum_{\ell\in r} 1/c_\ell$$.

The width of a set of paths $$R$$ is computed as follows,

  - First pick the path $$r^\ast$$ with the largest width.
    If multiple such paths exist, choose the one with shortest distance.
  - Then decrease the residual bandwidth on all links of $$r^\ast$$ by $$w_{r^\ast}$$, this essentially remove $$r^\ast$$ from next selection
  - Repeat this process until we exhaust $$R$$
  - The sum of all widths of paths is the width of $$R$$
  - The last path selected in this computation is denoted by $$\textrm{NARROWEST}(R)$$

To select η paths from the set $$\hat{R}_\sigma$$, the idea of the algorithm is as follows

  - Include a new path $$r\in\hat R_\sigma$$ to $$R_\sigma$$
    if it contributes to the largest resulting width to $$R_\sigma$$ and
    $$\lvert R_\sigma\rvert<\eta$$
  - If $$\lvert R_\sigma\rvert = \eta$$, a new path has to be added and an old path has to be removed,
    so that the resulting width is maximized
  - Such addition or addition/removal results in a new width of $$R_\sigma$$, it is accepted
    only if the new width is larger than the old width by a fraction of $$\psi$$
  - If no addition is made to $$R_\sigma$$, remove a path from it if this does not
    result in decreasing its width.

Property of this algorithm is to select a set of candidate paths that are mutually disjoint with respect to bottleneck links. This path selection procedure and the proportioning procedure are run together as a heuristic, to "trade-off slight increase in blocking for significant decrease in the number of candidate paths".

