---
layout: post
title: "Zhang et al (2011) Modeling and Understanding TCP Incast in Data Center Networks (INFOCOM)"
date: 2011-07-20 14:56:05 -0400
category: paper
bibtex:
  type: inproceedings
  title: "Modeling and Understanding TCP Incast in Data Center Networks"
  author: "Jiao Zhang and Fengyuan Ren and Chuang Lin"
  booktitle: "Proc. INFOCOM"
  address: "Shanghai, China"
  pages: "1377-1385"
  month: Apr
  year: 2011
---
This paper gives two reasons for incast, namely, block tail time out (BTTO) and
block head time out (BHTO). The former is about the lost of one of the several
last packet, which cannot produce enough dupack to signal fast retransmit; the
latter is about the lost of whole window of flow, which the sender is waiting
for ACK before sending more data.

By developing an analytical model, it is found that BTTO is the cause for small
number of concurrent flows to exhibit incast, and BHTO is the cause for large
number of concurrent flows to exhibit incast.

The model is formed as follows: Assuming we have $$N$$ flows in an incast
scenario. Because they are synchronized, their window increase is also
synchronized. Then we can model the queue dynamic as
$$Q_i=\min[(NW_i-CD-\phi)^+, B]$$, with $$W_i$$ the window size in $$i$$-th RTT, $$C$$
is the link speed, $$D$$ is the propagation delay constant, and $$\phi$$ accounts for
the variation in queueing delay as seen by different packet, as we expect the
queue length increase by $$N$$ in each RTT, the mean of $$\phi$$ is $$N/2$$. From this, we can
derive the RTT dynamics, the window dynamics, and number of packets sent, as
well as probability that a particular packet who joins the queue will see the
queue full.

There are some assumptions in the analysis: (1) It assumes the TCP flows are
undergoing congestion avoidance in the dynamics. (2) It assumes they are fully
synchronized, i.e. equal window size at anytime before the packet drop.

