---
layout: post
title: "Volume of n-ball"
date: 2012-06-26 17:39:25 -0400
tags: math
---

If we denote the Cartesian coordinate of a $$n$$-dimensional Euclidean space by a
$$n$$-vector $$\mathbf{x}$$, then a $$n$$-ball centered at the origin with radius $$r$$
is the set of points that satisfy

$$
||\mathbf{x}||_2 \le r
$$

Taking this definition, a 1-ball is the line segment $$[-r,r]$$, which its
"volume" is $$2r$$ and has no surface area. A 2-ball is a circle with radius $$r$$,
which has the "surface" area of $$2\pi r$$ and "volume" of $$\pi r^2$$.

Let us denote the volume of an $$n$$-ball with radius $$r$$ by $$V_n(r)$$, and
consider that $$n$$-ball is defined by

$$
\begin{align}
||\mathbf{x}||_2 = x_1^2 + x_2^2 + \cdots + x_{n-1}^2 + x_n^2 &\le r  \\
x_1^2 + x_2^2 + \cdots + x_{n-1}^2 &\le r - x_n^2
\end{align}
$$

Obviously

$$
0 \le r - x_n^2  \\
-r \le x_n \le r.
$$

Therefore, we can find $$V_n(r)$$ recursively:

$$
\begin{align}
V_n(r) &= \int_{-r}^r V_{n-1}(\sqrt{r^2-x_n^2})dx_n  \\
&= \int_{-r}^r V_{n-1}(r\sqrt{1-u^2})d(ru)  \\
&= r\int_{-1}^1 V_{n-1}(r\sqrt{1-u^2})du.  \\
\end{align}
$$

## Proportionality of Volume
Firstly, we prove $$V_n(r)$$ is proportional to $$r^n$$ by induction:

Consider $$n=1$$, $$V_1(r)=2r=rV_1(1)$$. If we have $$V_k(r)=r^kV_k(1)$$, then

$$
\begin{align}
V_{k+1}(r) &= r\int_{-1}^1 V_k(r\sqrt{1-u^2})du  \\
&= r\int_{-1}^1 (r\sqrt{1-u^2})^kV_k(1)du  \\
&= r^{k+1}\int_{-1}^1 (\sqrt{1-u^2})^kV_k(1)du  \\
&= r^{k+1}\int_{-1}^1 V_k(\sqrt{1-u^2})du  \\
&= r^{k+1}V_{k+1}(1).
\end{align}
$$

Thus

$$
V_n(r) = r^n V_n(1).
$$

## Formula for Volume

$$
\begin{align}
V_n(1) &= \int_{-1}^1 V_{n-1}(\sqrt{1-u^2})du \\
&= \int_{-1}^1 (\sqrt{1-u^2})^{n-1}V_{n-1}(1)du \\
&= V_{n-1}(1)\int_{-1}^1 (\sqrt{1-u^2})^{n-1}du.
\end{align}$$

If we denote for $$n>1$$,

$$
I_n = \int_{-1}^1 (\sqrt{1-u^2})^n du \\
$$

then

$$\begin{align}
V_n(1) &= V_{n-1}(1)I_{n-1} \\
&= V_{n-2}(1)I_{n-2}I_{n-1} \\
&= V_1(1)I_1I_2\cdots I_{n-1} \\
&= 2I_1I_2\cdots I_{n-1},
\end{align}$$

and

$$
V_n(r) = 2r^nI_1I_2\cdots I_{n-1},
$$

valid for $$n\ge 1$$ if we specially define $$I_0=1$$, and which

$$
I_n = \int_{-1}^1 (\sqrt{1-u^2})^n du = \int_{-\pi/2}^{\pi/2} \cos^{n+1}t dt = \int_0^{\pi} \sin^{n+1}t dt = \frac{\Gamma(\frac{n}{2}+1)}{\Gamma(\frac{n+3}{2})}\sqrt{\pi}
$$

where the Gamma function is defined as

$$
\Gamma(z) = \int_0^\infty e^{-t}t^{z-1} dt,
$$

with the property that $$z\Gamma(z) = \Gamma(z+1)$$, and $$\Gamma(n)=(n-1)!$$ for
positive integers $$n$$. But we can also consider $$I_n$$ without resolving to the
Gamma function. Consider that

$$\begin{align}
I_n &= \int_0^{\pi} \sin^{n+1}t dt  \\
&= \int_0^{\pi} \sin^n t \sin t dt  \\
&= [(-\cos t)\sin^n t]_0^{\pi} + \int_0^{\pi} n\cos^2 t\sin^{n-1} t dt  \\
&= n\int_0^{\pi} (1-\sin^2 t)\sin^{n-1} t dt  \\
&= n[I_{n-2}-I_n]  \\
\textrm{therefore}\quad I_n &= \frac{n}{n+1} I_{n-2}.
\end{align}$$

It is easy to see that $$I_1=\pi/2$$, $$I_2=4/3$$, $$I_3=3\pi/8$$, and

$$
I_nI_{n-1} = \frac{n}{n+1}I_{n-2}\frac{n-1}{n}I_{n-3} = \frac{n-1}{n+1}I_{n-2}I_{n-3}
$$

thus

$$\begin{align}
I_{2k}I_{2k-1}\cdots I_1 &= \frac{2k-1}{2k+1}(I_{2k-2}I_{2k-3})^2I_{2k-4}I_{2k-5}\cdots I_1 \\
&= \frac{2k-1}{2k+1}(\frac{2k-3}{2k-1})^2(I_{2k-4}I_{2k-5})^3I_{2k-6}I_{2k-7}\cdots I_1 \\
&= \frac{1}{2k+1}\frac{(2k-3)^2}{2k-1}(I_{2k-4}I_{2k-5})^3I_{2k-6}I_{2k-7}\cdots I_1 \\
&= \frac{1}{2k+1}\frac{1}{2k-1}\cdots\frac{1}{7}\frac{3^{k-1}}{5}(I_2I_1)^k \\
&= \frac{1}{2k+1}\frac{1}{2k-1}\cdots\frac{1}{7}\frac{3^{k-1}}{5}(\frac{2\pi}{3})^k \\
&= \frac{1}{2k+1}\frac{1}{2k-1}\cdots\frac{1}{7}\frac{1}{5}\frac{1}{3}(2\pi)^k \\
&= \frac{2^k k!}{(2k+1)!} (2\pi)^k  \\
&= \frac{2^{2k} k!}{(2k+1)!}\pi^k
\end{align}$$

and

$$\begin{align}
I_{2k-1}I_{2k-2}\cdots I_1 &= \frac{2k-2}{2k}(I_{2k-3}I_{2k-4})^2I_{2k-5}I_{2k-6}\cdots I_1 \\
&= \frac{2k-2}{2k}(\frac{2k-4}{2k-2})^2(I_{2k-5}I_{2k-6})^3I_{2k-7}I_{2k-8}\cdots I_1 \\
&= \frac{1}{2k}\frac{(2k-4)^2}{2k-2}(I_{2k-5}I_{2k-6})^3I_{2k-7}I_{2k-8}\cdots I_1 \\
&= \frac{1}{2k}\frac{1}{2k-2}\cdots\frac{4^{k-2}}{6}(I_3I_2)^{k-1}I_1 \\
&= \frac{1}{2k}\frac{1}{2k-2}\cdots\frac{4^{k-2}}{6}(\frac{\pi}{2})^k \\
&= \frac{1}{2k}\frac{1}{2k-2}\cdots\frac{2^{k-4}}{6}\pi^k \\
&= \frac{1}{k}\frac{1}{k-1}\cdots\frac{1}{3}\frac{\pi^k}{4} \\
&= \frac{1}{k!}\frac{\pi^k}{2}.
\end{align}$$

Therefore we have

$$\begin{align}
V_{2k+1}(r) &= 2r^{2k+1}\frac{2^{2k}k!}{(2k+1)!}\pi^k = \frac{2^{2k+1}k!}{(2k+1)!}\pi^kr^{2k+1} \\
V_{2k}(r) &= 2r^{2k}\frac{1}{k!}\frac{\pi^k}{2} = \frac{1}{k!}\pi^kr^{2k}.
\end{align}$$

Indeed, we can also prove by induction that

$$
V_n(1) = \frac{\pi^{n/2}}{\Gamma(\frac{n}{2}+1)}.
$$

And the surface area of the $$n$$-ball is obtained by $$\frac{d}{dr}V_n(r)$$.

## Alternative Derivation

Below is an alternative derivation by Greg Huber (1982). "Gamma function
derivation of n-sphere volumes". Am. Math. Monthly 89(5):301–302
([PDF](https://drive.google.com/open?id=0B6DoI_vm0OLfLTJjUkJIQTVYdEk))

Consider

$$\begin{align}
\Gamma(z) &=\int_0^{\infty} e^{-t}t^{z-1} dt  \\
&= \int_0^{\infty} e^{-u^2}u^{2z-2} d(u^2)  \\
&= 2 \int_0^{\infty} e^{-u^2}u^{2z-1} du.  \\
\Gamma(\tfrac{1}{2}) &= 2\int_0^{\infty} e^{-u^2} du = \sqrt{\pi},
\end{align}$$

for the reason that $$\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi\sigma^2}}\exp(-\frac{x^2}{2\sigma^2}) du = 1$$.

Denote the surface of $$n$$-ball by $$\omega_{n-1}(r)$$, we can write the volume as
the integration of surface area as the radius expands from zero:

$$
V_n(r) = \int_0^r \omega_{n-1}(1)u^{n-1} du = \frac{r^n}{n}\omega_{n-1}(1)
$$

or the volume as the integration of all the points in the ball:

$$
V_n(r) = \iint\cdots\int_{||\mathbf{x}||\le R} dx_1dx_2\cdots dx_n.
$$

Consider the density integration on an infinitely large $$n$$-ball, where the
density at point $$\mathbf{x}$$ is $$e^{-r^2}$$ with $$r$$ defined by

$$
r^2 = x_1^2 + x_2^2 + \cdots + x_n^2.
$$

Using the first integral we have (assumed radius 1)

$$
\int_0^{\infty} \omega_{n-1}r^{n-1}e^{-r^2}dr = \omega_{n-1}\int_0^\infty e^{-r^2}r^{n-1}dr = \frac{1}{2}\omega_{n-1}\Gamma(\frac{n}{2}).
$$

But using the second integral we have

$$\begin{align}
& \iint\cdots\int_{||\mathbf{x}||\le \infty} e^{-r^2} dx_1dx_2\cdots dx_n  \\
=&\iint\cdots\int_{||\mathbf{x}||\le \infty} e^{-x_1^2-x_2^2-\cdots-x_n^2} dx_1dx_2\cdots dx_n \\
=&\iint\cdots\int_{||\mathbf{x}||\le \infty} e^{-x_1^2}dx_1 e^{-x_2^2}dx_2\cdots e^{-x_n^2}dx_n \\
=&\left(\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} e^{-x^2}dx\right)^n \\
=&\pi^{n/2}.
\end{align}$$

Because they shall be equal, we have

$$\begin{align}
\frac{1}{2}\omega_{n-1}\Gamma(\frac{n}{2}) &= \pi^{n/2}  \\
\omega_{n-1} &= \frac{2\pi^{n/2}}{\Gamma(\frac{n}{2})}  \\
\omega_{n-1}(r) &= \frac{2\pi^{n/2}r^{n-1}}{\Gamma(\frac{n}{2})}  \\
V_n = \frac{1}{n}\omega_{n-1} &= \frac{2\pi^{n/2}}{n\Gamma(\frac{n}{2})}  \\
&= \frac{\pi^{n/2}}{\frac{n}{2}\Gamma(\frac{n}{2})}  \\
&= \frac{\pi^{n/2}}{\Gamma(\frac{n}{2}+1)}  \\
V_n(r) &= \frac{\pi^{n/2}r^n}{\Gamma(\frac{n}{2}+1)}.
\end{align}$$

We can also verify that $$\frac{d}{dr}V_n(r) = \omega_{n-1}(r)$$.

## Properties of n-ball
If we consider the $$n$$-ball with unit diameter instead of unit radius, its
volume is $$V_n(1/2)$$. We can see that, due to the exponential nature in the
denominator,

$$
\lim_{n\to\infty} V_n(\tfrac{1}{2}) = 0.
$$

Therefore, the higher the dimension, the denser we can pack the balls. I first learned this result from Professor Raymond Yeung.

## Reference
  * <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/N-sphere>
  * <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deriving_the_volume_of_an_n-ball>

