---
layout: post
title: "Murray (1993) A Drunk and Her Dog (AS)"
date: 2012-06-26 15:47:01 -0400
category: paper
bibtex:
  type: article
  author: "Michael P. Murray"
  title: "A Drunk and Her Dog: An Illustration of Cointegration and Error Correction"
  journal: "The American Statistician"
  volume: "48"
  number: "1"
  pages: "37--39"
  month: "Feb"
  year: "1994"
---
A paper to illustrate the concept of cointegration, a concept with a wide use in econometrics.

Consider a random walk $$x_t$$, which the step is guided by a stationary white-noise

$$
x_t - x_{t-1} = w_t
$$

Usually, a random walk is modeled as the footstep of a drunk. In the paper, it is assumed that a drunk is walking with a unleashed dog, which both of them follow a random but independent trail

$$
x_t - x_{t-1} = w_t  \\
y_t - y_{t-1} = u_t
$$

Such random walks are non-stationary as $$\lim_{t\to\infty} x_t$$ is hard to determine. Now consider the case that there is a correction between the drunk and the dog such that $$\lvert x_t - y_t\rvert$$, while random, shall not be too large. Then the walks $$x_t$$ and $$y_t$$ are said to be cointegrated.

If a non-stationary series would become stationary if it is differentiated for $$n$$ times, then the series is said to be "integrated of order $$n$$". Hence a stationary series is by definition integrated of order zero. The series above are integrated of order one, since

$$
x'_t = w_t
$$

and the white-noise term $$w_t$$ has zero mean.

For a set of series, if there is a linear combination of them with non-zero weights that, the linear combination is integrated of order $$n$$, then the set of series is said to be "cointegrated of order $$n$$". Obviously, a set of series which each of them is integrated of order $$n$$ will be cointegrated of order less than $$n$$.

Consider the random walks above, it is better to be modelled as

$$
x_t - x_{t-1} = w_t - c(x_{t-1} - y_{t-1})  \\
y_t - y_{t-1} = u_t + d(x_{t-1} - y_{t-1})
$$

Where the second term on the right is the error-correcting term. If the error-correcting term is non-stationary, the series are non-stationary too (consider that a stationary series must be integrated of order zero). But if $$c$$ and $$d$$ above are positive constants, however small are they, $$x_t-y_t$$ will stablise around zero.
