---
layout: post
title: How to fly a horse
subtitle: Kevin Ashton / 2015
date: Mon, 09 Apr 2018 21:46:06 -0400
category: book
bibtex:
  type: book
  title: How to fly a horse
  subtitle: The secret history of creation, invention, and discovery
  author: Kevin Ashton
  year: 2015
  publisher: Doubleday
  isbn: 978-0-385-53859-6
---

Book about human creativity.

Creativity is ordinary, not heroic. Creativity is an act of problem solving
(Allen Newell, "The Processes of Creativity Thinking", 1959). And creativity is
an incremental build on top of existing idea. Because of the incremental nature,
creativity is hard work.

Karl Duncker, "On Problem Solving", 1935. All man's mind works the same way,
unaffected by subject or thinker, but old idea obstructs new ones. The candle
and box of tacks problem: At one point, people stop seeing the box as a thing
for holding the tacks but a thing for holding the candle; that shift is an
insight.

Brain storming: deferring criticism added only bad ideas.

Vast majority of teachers say creativity is important but when tested, they
always favor less creative children: Because people who are more creative also
tend to be more playful, unconventional, and unpredictable. All these makes them
harder to control.

Newism: Prejudice against new things. People always do. Therefore, whether a
creative idea can success depends on how we react to the adverse condition of
newism.

Inattentional blindness: The bacterium Helicobacter pylori. "People's natural
predisposition not to see anything they don't want to, weren't expecting or
can't explain". Experts tend to have selective attention. Solution to the
inattentional blindness: shoshin, seeing what is there instead of seeing what we
think.

Thomas Kuhn, "The structure of scientific revolutions", 1962. Science proceeded
in a series of revolutions where ways of thinking (paradigms) changed
completely. Paradigms are a form of selective attention.

Eight motivations for creating (R. A. Ochse): desire for mastery, immortality,
money, recognition, self-esteem, the desire to create beauty, to prove oneself,
and to discover underlying order.

Stanford art collage experiment behind one-way mirror by Teresa Amabile: The
evaluated groups reported more anxiety than the nonevaluated groups. The more
anxious they were, the less creative they were. That is the reason Woody Allen
avoiding the Oscars so as to avoid potential destruction of external influence.

Another experiment by Amabile: choice and reward. In creative work, choice
transforms the role of reward. Members of the no choice-reward group reported
feeling the most pressure. Most creative work is by choice-reward group, second
my no reward groups. Passion is the most extreme state of choice without reward,
or reward on its own.

Ken McGraw hypotheses: Tasks involving discovery were disrupted by rewards, but
tasks that had one right answer, like math problems, were improved by them.

Writer's block: Loss of creativity by writer. A writer suffering from the
believe that they cannot write something they think is good. Cure: write
something you think is bad.

Kelly Johnson from Lockheed: He discovered that a small, isolated, highly
motived group is the best kind of team for creation. Story of Johnson and
Hall Hibbard: Intellectually secure people do not need to show anyone how smart
they are. They are empirical and seek truth. Intellectually insecure people need
to show everyone how smart they are. They are egotistical and seek triumph.
Truth-tellers are often eccentric and difficult to manage. They speak a strange
language, one that isn't focused on incremental change and polite
business-speak.

Vygotsky's research on children: The connection between language and creating
has an important consequence. Once children can solve problems by talking about
what they are doing, they have the basic skills they need to create with others.

