---
layout: post
title: Simplifying surds
date: Tue, 16 Jan 2018 23:43:16 -0500
tags: math
---

Recently I am investigating some geometric construction (i.e., compass and
ruler constructions) and encounter into the issue of finding sine for some
angles. I remember most whole number degree angles could be expressed in surd
forms, only it is less pretty than the standard angles of 30°, 45°, 60°. Mostly
I would start from the standard angles and break down to the degree I am
interested by half angle formula or angle sum and difference formula. But some
angle could result in surd under surd, for example:

$$ \sqrt{2 - \sqrt{3}} $$

Whether we can simplify this or express it in another format is the issue.

Let us start with the example. First consider if we want to factor it out into
a product. Obviously it is not possible to be a product of two surd forms, so
let us assume

$$ \sqrt{2 - \sqrt{3}} = \sqrt{a}(\sqrt{b}-c). $$

We use $$\sqrt{b}-c$$ instead of $$\sqrt{b}+c$$ because we observed the negative
sign in $$-\sqrt{3}$$. We may also try with
$$\sqrt{2 - \sqrt{3}} = \sqrt{a}(c-\sqrt{b})$$ but we will know in the following
if this is actually the case. Move the bracket term to under the surd gives:

$$\begin{aligned}
\sqrt{2 - \sqrt{3}} &= \sqrt{a}(\sqrt{b}-c) \\
&= \sqrt{a (b-2c\sqrt{b}+c^2)} \\
&= \sqrt{ab+ac^2-2ac\sqrt{b}}
\end{aligned}$$

Therefore,

$$\begin{aligned}
ab+ac^2 &=2\\
2ac &= 1\\
b &= 3.
\end{aligned}$$

Expressing $$c$$ in terms of $$a$$ gives the quadratic equation $$12a^2-8a+1=0$$ and
solving this gives $$(a,b,c)=(\frac{1}{2},3,1)$$ or $$(a,b,c)=(\frac{1}{6},3,3)$$.
These two, indeed, corresponds to

$$ \sqrt{2 - \sqrt{3}} = \sqrt{\frac{1}{2}}(\sqrt{3}-1) = \sqrt{\frac{1}{6}}(3-\sqrt{3}) $$

which are the same (and explains why we assume the form $$\sqrt{a}(\sqrt{b}-c)$$
is enough).

Another approach[^ta] is not to factor it out but express into sum of two surds:

$$ \sqrt{2 - \sqrt{3}} = \sqrt{a} - \sqrt{b}. $$

Again, we take $$\sqrt{a}-\sqrt{b}$$ instead of $$\sqrt{a}+\sqrt{b}$$ because we
observed the negative sign of $$-\sqrt{3}$$. This time, we squared both side and
found that $$2 - \sqrt{3} = a + b - 2\sqrt{ab}$$. By solving $$a+b=2$$ and $$4ab=3$$,
we have $$(a,b)=(\frac{1}{2},\frac{3}{2})$$ or $$(a,b)=(\frac{3}{2},\frac{1}{2})$$.
Because we take only positive values for the surd, comparing the expression for
correct polarity we found that the solution should be

$$ \sqrt{2 - \sqrt{3}} = \sqrt{\frac{3}{2}} - \sqrt{\frac{1}{2}}. $$

It turns out, simplifying surds directly does not seems possible but we can
easily do it if we first assume the form we want to obtain.
[Here](https://www.intmath.com/blog/mathematics/how-do-you-find-exact-values-for-the-sine-of-all-angles-6212)
contains a list of sine values for all integer angles from 0° to 90°, but the
surd forms are ugly. Probably we can simplify them using this approach.

[^ta]: This form is described in Tutorial Algebra Volume 1
