---
layout: post
title: Pantheon on Debian Buster
date: Mon, 14 Oct 2019 17:03:19 -0400
tags: system
---

Pantheon desktop or the elementaryOS are temptingly beautiful. What I see most
attractive is the Pantheon terminal, which, in my opinion, finally we get a
Linux terminal on par with what macOS can provide.

However, the official Debian repository does not carry Pantheon. So to use it,
I can either install elementaryOS and side load Debian into it, or the other
way round: On <https://gandalfn.ovh/> we can download an ISO for Debian
Buster+Pantheon Desktop installation. It will boot with lightdm and load the
full set of Pantheon desktop GUI. So simply speaking:

    wget https://gandalfn.ovh/iso/pantheon-buster-juno-amd64.hybrid.iso
    dd if=pantheon-buster-juno-amd64.hybrid.iso of=/dev/rdisk3 bs=1M

will give you a USB thumbdrive installer. Then install with it will have a
Pantheon desktop running on Debian buster, with the Pantheon repository added
to the apt system.

**But.** Do not blindly `apt-get update; apt-get dist-upgrade` on it after install.
It will break.

After some painstakingly debug, it is found that the issue lies on this package:

    https://gandalfn.ovh/debian/pool/main/p/pantheon-greeter/pantheon-greeter_3.3.1-0+pantheon+buster+juno5_amd64.deb

The original (working) Debian package is versioned
`3.3.1-0+pantheon+buster+juno3`. I cannot tell how the `juno5` and `juno3` are
different, but everything were fine until this package is upgraded. Then,
loading of lightdm will give you this `GLib-GIO-ERROR` on its log:

    Settings schema 'org.gnome.settings-daemon.plugins.housekeeping' does not contain a key named 'active'

it is same as [this issue](https://github.com/elementary/greeter/issues/226)
but I may need to instigate the Debian source package to tell if, as mentioned
in the github issue, simply because of an omitted build switch.

So this is the correct upgrade process after initial installation:

1. Install with the Pantheon+Buster ISO, just like an ordinary Debian
2. Go to terminal
    1. comment out the source list at `/etc/apt/sources.list.d/pantheon-debian.list`
    2. add `deb http://deb.debian.org/debian buster-updates main contrib non-free` to `/etc/apt/sources.list`
3. `apt-get update; apt-get dist-upgrade` to bring the Debian base up to date
4. Uncomment the source list at `/etc/apt/sources.list.d/pantheon-debian.list`; then `apt-get update`
5. Manually upgrade (`apt-get install`) everything except `pantheon-greeter`
4. Comment out again the source list at `/etc/apt/sources.list.d/pantheon-debian.list`; then `apt-get update`

The repository seems not upgraded for months. So I would believe it is just
fine to disable that. For now.
