---
layout: post
title: "Pimbley (2016) Better measurements for CLO equity performance"
date: 2019-11-20
category: paper
bibtex:
   type: article
   title: Better measurements for CLO equity performance
   author: Joseph M. Pimbley
   journal: The Journal of Structured Finance
   volume: Summer
   year: 2016
   pages: 24--30
---

A short paper arguing how to evaluate CLO equity performance. As the equity
tranche of a CLO has a maturity date, we can consider that as a bond with
indeterministic coupon. So it is natural to use IRR as a measure for equity.
IRR is the solution of $$r$$ in

$$\sum_j \frac{p_j}{(1+r)^{t_j}} = 0$$

where $$p_j$$ is the payment (negative if from investor) and $$t_j$$ is the
time measured in years. IRR measures the yield amounts to break-even PV of
cash flows.

Problems of IRR:
- different IRR for different compounding period
- market rate affects rate of return but IRR can't distinguish the attribution of yields
- In case of zero or negative profit: IRR give more negative $$r$$ for shorter term of recovery
  - e.g., zero profit, recover whole investment in 1 yr vs 10 yr are both IRR 0%
  - e.g., loss, recover 50% of investment in 1 yr vs 10 yr. 10 yr has less negative IRR

Alternative measure is "return of exposure" (ROX). The paper claims that it is
similar to discount margin

$$ROX = \sum_{j=0}^N z_j\frac{p_j}{\phi_0 D}$$

where $$z_j$$ are zero coupon discount factors, $$\phi_0$$ is exposure par amount, $$D$$ is *spread duration*,

$$D=\sum_{j=1}^N z_j(t_j-t_{j-1})\frac{\phi_{j-1}}{\phi_0}$$

with $$\phi_j$$ the remaining par of the investment at time $$t_j$$. ROX is the
PV of all payments received ($$j=1,\cdots,N$$) minus the PV of all funded
investments ($$j=0$$), divided by the sum-product of exposure par amount and
duration. If the investment return if LIBOR-flat (i.e., LIBOR+0), ROX is zero.

The metric this paper proposed is "CLO Sharpe" (CLO#). Defined as follows:
Excess return $$\xi_j$$ (for $$j=1,\cdots,N$$) is actual payments $$p_j$$ minus
the LIBOR interest on outstanding residual par

$$\xi_j = p_j - \psi_{j-1}L_{j-1}(t_j-t_{j-1})$$

with $$\psi_0=\phi_0$$, $$\phi_j=\phi_{j-1}-\xi_j$$ for $$j=1,\cdots,N$$

The proposed volatility measure:

$$CLO\# = \frac{\textrm{mean}(\xi_j)}{\textrm{StdDev}(\xi_j)}$$

