---
layout: post
title: DD-WRT on Linksys
date: Sun, 22 Nov 2020 21:31:55 -0500
tags: system
---

I have been using a Linksys WRT3200ACM (with DD-WRT installed) for a while now
and I decided to make a better use of such a high-end WiFi router. These are
some notes that worth to write down:

## DD-WRT as a NAS

Such router goes with 512MB memory and 256MB flash in two partition. So
theoretically each flash can be as big as 128MB. The DD-WRT in such size goes
with a newer kernel and a better suite of software. Mine is running 4.9 kernel.
Even the kernel has exfat module, it does not seem to work. The USB storage in
exfat is recognized but cannot be mounted. If we try to mount it in command
line, the terminal hangs (only the system blocks that command, but the router
does not, you cann launch a new SSH session into it). Partitions formatted in
ext4 works perfectly however.

I make use of the external disk to install
[Entware](https://wiki.dd-wrt.com/wiki/index.php/Installing_Entware), which is
like an apt-get in the DD-WRT environment, but with limited number of packages
available. Entware is mandatory to install to `/opt`. So I mounted the
partition there. As the Linksys is running ARMv7, this is the command to 
install:

```
cd /opt
wget http://bin.entware.net/armv7sf-k3.2/installer/generic.sh
sh generic.sh
opkg update
opkg upgrade
```

it is suggested to add these to the DD-WRT start-up script:

    sleep 10; /opt/etc/init.d/rc.unslung start

and this to the shutdown script:

    /opt/etc/init.d/rc.unslung stop

but what these seems to do is only to call the init scripts in case of any
installed under Entware environment. Hence optional if no daemon is installed.

For the USB disk connected to the router, we can share it using Samba (under
service → NAS), as public share (no authenatication required) or
username/password share.

## PXE boot

In a full featured system, there are way more options available. It is not the
case under DD-WRT. The DHCP server in DD-WRT (DNSmasq) can send responses with
boot options. While DNSmasq also goes with TFTP server, the version in DD-WRT
is a stripped down one, so you need another TFTP daemon from from Entware. This
is to install `tftpd-hpa` and launch it with `xinetd`:

```
opkg install xinetd
opkg install tftpd-hpa
mkdir /opt/tftproot
mkdir /opt/tftproot/pxelinux.cfg
```

then make this into `/opt/etc/xinetd.d/tftp` so that `xinetd` can launch the
TFTP server:

```
service tftp
{
    flags            = REUSE
    socket_type      = dgram
    protocol         = udp
    instances        = 30
    wait             = yes
    user             = root
    server           = /opt/sbin/tftpd-hpa
    server_args      = -4 -B 1468 -s /opt/tftproot
    cps              = 100 2
    log_on_success   = HOST PID
    log_on_failure   = HOST
    disable          = no
}
```

and this into `/opt/tftproot/pxelinux.cfg/default` as the boot menu:

```
DEFAULT menu.c32

PROMPT 1
TIMEOUT 300
ONTIMEOUT Debian x64 Diskless

LABEL reboot
        MENU LABEL reboot computer
        COM32 reboot.c32

LABEL local
        MENU LABEL boot local drive
        LOCALBOOT 0

LABEL Debian x64 Diskless
        MENU LABEL Debian x64
        KERNEL vmlinuz
        APPEND vga=858 rw ip=dhcp initrd=initrd.img root=/dev/nfs nfsroot=192.168.1.1:/debianroot
```

Optionally, we can also install `vim` with Entware. To help editing files in
console. Then we need to copy the files `pxelinux.0`, `ldlinux.c32`, `menu.c32`
into the TFTP root directory (`/opt/tftproot/`), and prepare the installed OS
at the NFS mount location.

After all is done, add the following to the "Additional DNSMasq Options" in the
DD-WRT webui, under Services → Services:

    dhcp-boot=pxelinux.0,gateway,192.168.1.1


Then the client who's booting with PXE will work.

## SSH on DD-WRT

The SSH server (as well as client) are dropbear, but only compiled with RSA
(for size concern?). Therefore, we can only assign a RSA key for authentication
if you prefer not to use password-based.
