---
layout: post
title: "Kelly (1956) A new interpretation of information rate"
date: Wed, 18 Nov 2020 16:22:21 -0500
category: paper
bibtex:
   type: article
   author: "J. L. Kelly"
   title: "A new interpretation of information rate"
   journal: "Bell System Technical Journal"
   volume: 35
   number: 4
   pages: "917--926"
   year: 1956
---

Shannon defined the information rate as the number of bits transmitted per
second, which bit is a unit for entropy, i.e., probability is involved. We can
relate the information rate with $$R=rH$$, where $$r$$ is the rate that message
is delivered and $$H$$ is the entropy of each message. So $$R$$ is the
information rate. The paper by Kelly in 1956 is trying to find a physical
example to the information rate and the gambler's ruin is the topic of the
paper.

In its simplest form, the paper consider the case of gamble which wins at a
probability of $$q$$ and losts at $$p$$. Surely gambler's ruin will happen for
$$p>0.5$$ and the expected value of the fortune will grow exponentially on
every bet otherwise. If we consider we bet only $$\ell$$ fraction of the total
fortune each time, and introduce a logarithmic *utility function* to the
fortune, then the expected utility after each bet will become

$$
G = q\log(1+\ell) + p\log(1-\ell)
$$

which, we can find the optimal $$\ell$$ to maximize $$G$$ to be $$1+\ell=2q$$, or

$$
G_\max = 1 + p\log p + q\log q
$$

This is the information rate of a binary channel of probability $$p$$ as well.

The paper later extended this binary channel example to $$n$$-ary channel.
This solution to maximize the expected utility function is called the Kelly's
criterion. To paraphrase, if the bet will win the odd of $$b$$ then the
expected utility will be

$$
G = q\log(1+\ell b) + (1-q)\log(1-\ell)
$$

and we can find its maximum with

$$
\begin{align}
\frac{dG}{d\ell} &= \frac{qb}{1+\ell b} - \frac{1-q}{1-\ell} = 0 \\
\therefore \ell &= \frac{qb+q-1}{b}
\end{align}
$$

If we choose a different utility function, the result will be different. For
example, a linear utility $$f(x)=x$$ makes $$G$$ the expected return and the maximizer
will be $$\ell=1$$ or $$\ell=0$$ depends on whether $$qb > 1-q$$.
Alternatively, if we pick quadratic function $$f(x)=x^2$$ as the utility, we
will have the maximizer to be $$\ell = \frac{1+q-qb}{1-b+qb^2}$$.

In the case of risk management (such as in stock market investment), quite
often we compute the return of a stock using $$\log(S_t/S_{t-1})$$, instead
of the more intuitive $$(S_t-S_{t-1})/S_{t-1}$$. The above reveals why: We are
applying a logarithmic utility function to the amount of money which exhibits
the law of diminishing return and penalize loss more than the reward in profit.
