---
layout: post
title: "Taylor & Letham (2018) Forecasting at Scale"
date: Mon, 08 Nov 2021 15:08:19 -0500
category: paper
bibtex:
  type: article
  title: "Forecasting at Scale"
  author: "Sean J. Taylor and Benjamin Letham"
  journal : "The American Statistician"
  volume: 72
  number: 1
  year: 2018
  pages: 37--45
  doi: "10.1080/00031305.2017.1380080"
---

This is the paper for [Facebook Prophet](https://facebook.github.io/prophet/).
It considers time series $$y(t)$$ as a composition of trend, seasonality, and
holidays under generalized additive model (GAM):

$$
y(t) = g(t) + s(t) + h(t) + \epsilon_t
$$

which the trend $$g(t)$$ is non-periodic, the seasonality $$s(t)$$ is periodic,
and holiday $$h(t)$$ is the effect of holidays which occur irregularly. The
error term $$\epsilon_t$$ is assumed Gaussian. Fitting new components in GAM
can be done using L-BFGS.  Prophet is a curve-fitting model; in contrary to
ARIMA which is a generative one. Hence data needd not to be regularly spaced
and we do not need interpolation for missing data.


Prophet allows trend $$g(t)$$ to be nonlinear and satuating. The basic form is

$$
g(t) = \frac{C}{1+\exp(-k(t-m))}
$$

which the growth rate is $$k$$, time offset is $$m$$, and growth ceiling is $$C$$ (i.e., the
capacity). The extension is a piecewise logistic growth model

$$
g(t) = \frac{C(t)}{1+\exp(-(k+\mathbf{a}(t)^T\mathbf{\delta})(t-(m+\mathbf{a}(t)^T\mathbf{\gamma})))}
$$

where $$C(t)$$ is to model the non-constant capacity, and $$\mathbf{a}(t)$$ is
to model the change points at which the growth rate updated. In detail, it is a vector that

$$
a_j(t) = \begin{cases}1 & \text{if }t\ge s_j\\ 0 & \text{otherwise}\end{cases}
$$

and at time $$s_j$$ the growth rate change by $$\delta_j$$, hence at any time, the growth rate is given by

$$
k + \sum_{j: t> s_j} \delta_j
$$

and the time offset should be changed accordingly, which

$$
\gamma_j = \big(s_j - m - \sum_{i<j} \gamma_i\big)\big(1-\frac{k+\sum_{i<j}\delta_i}{k+\sum_{i\le j}\delta_i}\big)
$$

For a linear trend, it can be simplified into (with $$\gamma_j = -s_j\delta_j$$):

$$
g(t) = (k+\mathbf{a}(t)^T\mathbf{\delta})t + (m+\mathbf{a}(t)^T\mathbf{\gamma})
$$

The model of rate change has an implication in forecasting. The paper suggested
a prior of $$\delta_j \sim \text{Laplace}(0,\tau)$$ and the parameter $$\tau$$
is fitted with data. Then the change and change point will be forecasted as a
simulated stochastic process.

The seasonality is approximated using Fourier series model:

$$
s(t) = \sum_{n=1}^N \big( a_n \cos \frac{2\pi nt}{P} + b_n \sin \frac{2\pi nt}{P}\big)
$$

in the paper, it is proposed to fit the Fourier model by using a seasonality vector:

$$
\begin{aligned}
X(t) &= \big[\cos\frac{2\pi(1)t}{365.25}, \cdots, \sin\frac{2\pi(10)t}{365.25}\big] \\
\mathbf{\beta} &= [a_1, b_1, \cdots, a_10, b_10] \\
s(t) &= X(t)^T \mathbf{\beta}
\end{aligned}
$$

The paper claimed that $$N=10$$ as above performs well for yearly seasonality
while $$N=3$$ is good for weekly. This design choice can be confirmed using
AIC, for example.

Holiday terms are simple, just a binary function that injects impulse
$$\kappa$$ to $$y(t)$$ whenever $$t$$ is a holiday (as defined by a custom
list). The impulse $$\kappa\sim\text{Normal}(0,\sigma^2)$$.

With the model defined, then Prophet will run L-BFGS to fit the paramters.
